Learning Objectives
1. Describe the range of applications of statistics
2. Identify situations in which statistics can be misleading
3. Define “Statistics”

1. Describe the range of applications of statistics

Statistics include numerical facts and figures. For instance:
• The largest earthquake measured 9.2 on the Richter scale.
• Men are at least 10 times more likely than women to commit murder.
• One in every 8 South Africans is HIV positive.
• By the year 2020, there will be 15 people aged 65 and over for every new baby
born.

2. Identify situations in which statistics can be misleading

The study of statistics involves math and relies upon calculations of numbers. But
it also relies heavily on how the numbers are chosen and how the statistics are
interpreted. For example, consider the following three scenarios and the
interpretations based upon the presented statistics. You will find that the numbers
may be right, but the interpretation may be wrong. Try to identify a major flaw
with each interpretation before we describe it.

1) A new advertisement for Ben and Jerry's ice cream introduced in
late May of last year resulted in a 30% increase in ice cream sales for
the following three months. Thus, the advertisement was effective.
A major flaw is that ice cream consumption generally increases in the
months of June, July, and August regardless of advertisements. This
effect is called a history effect and leads people to interpret outcomes
as the result of one variable when another variable (in this case, one
having to do with the passage of time) is actually responsible.

2) The more churches in a city, the more crime there is. Thus,
churches lead to crime.
A major flaw is that both increased churches and increased crime rates
can be explained by larger populations. In bigger cities, there are both
more churches and more crime. This problem refers to the third-variable problem,which we will discuss in detail further.
Namely, a third variable can cause both situations; however, people
erroneously believe that there is a causal relationship between the two
primary variables rather than recognize that a third variable can cause
both.

3) 75% more interracial marriages are occurring this year than 25
years ago. Thus, our society accepts interracial marriages.
A major flaw is that we don't have the information that we need. What
is the rate at which marriages are occurring? Suppose only 1% of
marriages 25 years ago were interracial and so now 1.75% of
marriages are interracial (1.75 is 75% higher than 1). But this latter
number is hardly evidence suggesting the acceptability of interracial
marriages. In addition, the statistic provided does not rule out the
possibility that the number of interracial marriages has seen dramatic
fluctuations over the years and this year is not the highest. Again,
there is simply not enough information to understand fully the impact
of the statistics.

3. Define “Statistics”

As a whole, these examples show that statistics are not only facts and figures; they
are something more than that. In the broadest sense, “statistics” refers to a range of
techniques and procedures for analyzing, interpreting, displaying, and making
decisions based on data.
